#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass book
\language english
\inputencoding latin1
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize a4paper
\paperpackage widemarginsa4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 2
\tocdepth 2
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 2
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Chapter

Tango object naming (device, attribute and property)
\layout Section

Device name
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{DeviceNaming}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

A Tango device name is a three fields name.
 The field separator is the 
\series bold 
/
\series default 
 character.
 The first field is named 
\series bold 
domain
\series default 
, the second field is named 
\series bold 
family
\series default 
 and the last field is named 
\series bold 
member
\series default 
.A tango device name looks like
\begin_inset ERT
status Collapsed

\layout Standard
 
\backslash 
begin{center}
\end_inset 

domain/family/member
\begin_inset ERT
status Collapsed

\layout Standard

\backslash 
end{center} 
\end_inset 

It is a hierarchical notation.
 The member specifies which element within a family.
 The family specifies which kind of equipment within a domain.
 The domain groups devices related to which part of the accelerator/experiment
 they belongs to.
 At ESRF, some of the machine control system domain name are SR for the
 storage ring, TL1 for the transfer line 1 or SY for the synchrotron booster.
 For experiment, ID11 is the domain name for all devices belonging to the
 experiment behind insertion device 11.
 Here are some examples of Tango device name used at the ESRF :
\layout Itemize


\series bold 
sr/d-ct/1
\series default 
 : The current transformer.
 The domain part is sr for storage ring.
 The family part is d-ct for diagnostic/current transformer and the member
 part is 1
\layout Itemize


\series bold 
fe/v-pen/id11-1
\series default 
 : A Penning gauge.
 The domain part is fe for front-end.
 The family part is v-pen for vacuum/penning and the member name is id11-1
 to specify that this is the first gauge on the front-end part after the
 insertion device 11
\layout Section

Full object name
\layout Standard

The device name as described above is not enough to cover all Tango usage
 like device server without database or device access for multi control
 system.
 With the naming schema, we must also be able to name attribute and property.
 Therefore, the full naming schema is
\begin_inset ERT
status Collapsed

\layout Standard

\backslash 
begin{center}
\end_inset 


\emph on 
[protocol://][host:port/]device_name[/attribute][->property][#dbase=xx
\emph default 

\begin_inset ERT
status Collapsed

\layout Standard
]
\backslash 
end{center}
\end_inset 

The protocol, host, port, attribute, property and dbase fields are optional.
 The meaning of these fields are :
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

protocol : Specifies which protocol is used (Tango or Taco).
 Tango is the default
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

dbase=xx : The supported value for xx is 
\emph on 
yes
\emph default 
 and 
\emph on 
no
\emph default 
.
 This field is used to specify that the device is a device served by a device
 server started with or without database usage.
 The default value is 
\emph on 
dbase=yes
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

host:port : This field has different meaning according to the dbase value.
 If 
\emph on 
dbase=yes
\emph default 
 (the default), the host is the host where the control system database server
 is running and port is the database server port.
 It has a higher priority than the value defined by the TANGO_HOST environment
 variable.
 If 
\emph on 
dbase=no
\emph default 
, host is the host name where the device server process serving the device
 is running and port is the device server process port.
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

attribute : The attribute name
\layout List
\labelwidthstring 00.00.0000

property : The property name
\layout Standard

The host:port and dbase=xx fields are necessary only when creating the DevicePro
xy object used to remotely access the device.
 The -> characters are used to specify a property name.
\layout Subsection

Some examples
\layout Subsubsection

Full device name examples
\layout Itemize


\series bold 
gizmo:20000/sr/d-ct/1
\series default 
 : Device sr/d-ct/1 running in a specified control system with the database
 server running on a host called gizmo and using the port number 20000.
 The TANGO_HOST environment variable will not be used.
\layout Itemize


\series bold 
tango://freak:2345/id11/rv/1#dbase=no
\series default 
 : Device served by a device server started without database.
 The server is running on a host called freak and use port number 2345.
 //freak:2345/id11/rv/1#dbase=no is also possible for the same device.
\layout Itemize


\series bold 
Taco://sy/ps-ki/1
\series default 
 : Taco device sy/ps-ki/1
\layout Subsubsection

Attribute name examples
\layout Itemize


\series bold 
id11/mot/1/Position
\series default 
 : Attribute position for device id11/mot/1 
\layout Itemize


\series bold 
sr/d-ct/1/Lifetime
\series default 
 : Attribute lifetime for Tango device sr/d-ct/1
\layout Subsubsection

Attribute property name
\layout Itemize


\series bold 
id11/rv/1/temp->label
\series default 
 : Property label for attribute temp for device id11/rv/1.
\layout Itemize


\series bold 
sr/d-ct/1/Lifetime->unit
\series default 
 : The unit property for the Lifetime attribute of the sr/d-ct/1 device
\layout Subsubsection

Device property name
\layout Itemize


\series bold 
sr/d-ct/1->address
\series default 
 : the address property for device sr/d-ct/1
\layout Subsubsection

Class property name
\layout Itemize


\series bold 
Starter->doc_url
\series default 
 : The doc_url property for a class called Starter
\layout Section

Device and attribute name alias
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{alias}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Within Tango, each device or attribute can have an alias name defined in
 the database.
 Every time a device or an attribute name is requested by the API's, it
 is possible to use the alias.
 The alias is simply an open string stored in the database.
 The rule of the alias is to give device or attribute name a name more natural
 from the physicist point of view.
 Let's imagine that for experiment, the sample position is described by
 angles called teta and psi in physics book.
 It is more natural for physicist when they move the motor related to sample
 position to use 
\emph on 
teta
\emph default 
 and 
\emph on 
psi
\emph default 
 rather device name like 
\emph on 
idxx/mot/1
\emph default 
 or 
\emph on 
idxx/mot/2
\emph default 
.
 An attribute alias is a synonym for the four fields used to name an attribute.
 For instance, the attribute 
\emph on 
Current
\emph default 
 of a power-supply device called 
\emph on 
sr/ps/dipole
\emph default 
 could have an alias 
\emph on 
DipoleCurrent
\emph default 
.
 This alias can be used when creating an instance of a AttributeProxy class
 instead of the full attribute name which is 
\emph on 
sr/ps/dipole/Current
\emph default 
.
 Device alias name are uniq within a Tango control system.
 Attribute alias name are also uniq within a Tango control system.
\layout Section

Reserved words and characters, limitations
\layout Standard

From the naming schema described above, the reserved characters are 
\series bold 
:
\series default 
,
\series bold 
#
\series default 
,
\series bold 
/
\series default 
 and the reserved string is :
\series bold 
 ->
\series default 
.
 On top of that, the dbt_update tool (tool to fulfill database from the
 content of a file) reserved the 
\series bold 
device
\series default 
 word
\layout Standard

The device name, its domain, member and family fields and its alias are
 stored in the Tango database.
 The default maximum size for these items are :
\layout Standard
\added_space_top 0.3cm \added_space_bottom 0.3cm \align center 

\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="6" columns="2">
<features islongtable="true">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="0pt">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Item
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

max length
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

device name
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

255
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

domain field
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

85
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

family field
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

85
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

member field
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

85
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

device alias name
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

255
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The device name, the command name, the attribute name, the property name,
 the device alias name and the device server name are 
\series bold 
case insensitive
\series default 
.
\the_end
